From fairest creatures we desire increase,That thereby beauty's rose might never die,But as the riper should by time decease,His tender heir might bear his memory:But thou contracted to thine own bright eyes,Feed'st thy light's flame with self-substantial fuel,Making a famine where abundance lies,Thy self thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel:Thou that art now the world's fresh ornament,And only herald to the gaudy spring,Within thine own bud buriest thy content,And tender churl mak'st waste in niggarding:Pity the world, or else this glutton be,To eat the world's due, by the grave and thee.
ALLS WELL THAT ENDS WELLby William ShakespeareDramatis PersonaeKING OF FRANCETHE DUKE OF FLORENCEBERTRAM, Count of RousillonLAFEU, an old lordPAROLLES, a follower of BertramTWO FRENCH LORDS, serving with BertramSTEWARD, Servant to the Countess of RousillonLAVACHE, a clown and Servant to the Countess of RousillonA PAGE, Servant to the Countess of RousillonCOUNTESS OF ROUSILLON, mother to BertramHELENA, a gentlewoman protected by the CountessA WIDOW OF FLORENCE.DIANA, daughter to the WidowVIOLENTA, neighbour and friend to the WidowMARIANA, neighbour and friend to the WidowLords, Officers, Soldiers, etc., French and FlorentineSCENE:Rousillon; Paris; Florence; MarseillesACT I. SCENE 1.Rousillon. The COUNT'S palaceEnter BERTRAM, the COUNTESS OF ROUSILLON, HELENA, and LAFEU, all in blackCOUNTESS. In delivering my son from me, I bury a second husband.BERTRAM. And I in going, madam, weep o'er my father's death anew;but I must attend his Majesty's command, to whom I am now inward, evermore in subjection.LAFEU. You shall find of the King a husband, madam; you, sir, afather. He that so generally is at all times good must ofnecessity hold his virtue to you, whose worthiness would stir itup where it wanted, rather than lack it where there is suchabundance.COUNTESS. What hope is there of his Majesty's amendment?LAFEU. He hath abandon'd his physicians, madam; under whosepractices he hath persecuted time with hope, and finds no otheradvantage in the process but only the losing of hope by time.COUNTESS. This young gentlewoman had a father- O, that 'had,' howsad a passage 'tis!-whose skill was almost as great as hishonesty; had it stretch'd so far, would have made natureimmortal, and death should have play for lack of work. Would, forthe King's sake, he were living! I think it would be the death ofthe King's disease.LAFEU. How call'd you the man you speak of, madam?COUNTESS. He was famous, sir, in his profession, and it was hisgreat right to be so- Gerard de Narbon.LAFEU. He was excellent indeed, madam; the King very lately spokeof him admiringly and mourningly; he was skilful enough to haveliv'd still, if knowledge could be set up against mortality.BERTRAM. What is it, my good lord, the King languishes of?LAFEU. A fistula, my lord.BERTRAM. I heard not of it before.LAFEU. I would it were not notorious. Was this gentlewoman thedaughter of Gerard de Narbon?COUNTESS. His sole child, my lord, and bequeathed to myoverlooking. I have those hopes of her good that her educationpromises; her dispositions she inherits, which makes fair giftsfairer; for where an unclean mind carries virtuous qualities,there commendations go with pity-they are virtues and traitorstoo. In her they are the better for their simpleness; she derivesher honesty, and achieves her goodness.LAFEU. Your commendations, madam, get from her tears.COUNTESS. 'Tis the best brine a maiden can season her praise in.The remembrance of her father never approaches her heart but thetyranny of her sorrows takes all livelihood from her cheek. Nomore of this, Helena; go to, no more, lest it be rather thoughtyou affect a sorrow than to have-HELENA. I do affect a sorrow indeed, but I have it too.LAFEU. Moderate lamentation is the right of the dead: excessivegrief the enemy to the living.COUNTESS. If the living be enemy to the grief, the excess makes itsoon mortal.BERTRAM. Madam, I desire your holy wishes.LAFEU. How understand we that?COUNTESS. Be thou blest, Bertram, and succeed thy fatherIn manners, as in shape! Thy blood and virtueContend for empire in thee, and thy goodnessShare with thy birthright! Love all, trust a few,Do wrong to none; be able for thine enemyRather in power than use, and keep thy friendUnder thy own life's key; be check'd for silence,But never tax'd for speech. What heaven more will,That thee may furnish, and my prayers pluck down,Fall on thy head! Farewell. My lord,'Tis an unseason'd courtier; good my lord,Advise him.LAFEU. He cannot want the bestThat shall attend his love.COUNTESS. Heaven bless him! Farewell, Bertram.ExitBERTRAM. The best wishes that can be forg'd in your thoughts beservants to you!  [To HELENA]  Be comfortable to my mother, yourmistress, and make much of her.LAFEU. Farewell, pretty lady; you must hold the credit of yourfather.Exeunt BERTRAM and LAFEUHELENA. O, were that all! I think not on my father;And these great tears grace his remembrance moreThan those I shed for him. What was he like?I have forgot him; my imaginationCarries no favour in't but Bertram's.I am undone; there is no living, none,If Bertram be away. 'Twere all oneThat I should love a bright particular starAnd think to wed it, he is so above me.In his bright radiance and collateral lightMust I be comforted, not in his sphere.Th' ambition in my love thus plagues itself:The hind that would be mated by the lionMust die for love. 'Twas pretty, though a plague,
Bye.